  
**Who is John Galt? Dave Chappelle**

Dave Chappelle is misogynistic, obscene and a terrible influence on youth; but he has also won prestigious awards, been hailed by many as the voice of his generation, and was even invited for a deep exploration of his career with Maya Angelou, among others.  If anyone could be called a master of toeing the line, it’s Dave Chappelle.    
Ayn Rand, on the other hand, was not so graceful. While she also created without boundaries, she failed to achieve broad appeal, and instead settled into a cultish, closed community.  While this community has been wildly influential, she never achieved the same kind of acceptance as Dave.  That said, I’d like to explore several points of comparison between John Galt, Rand’s key character in *Atlas Shrugged*, and Dave Chappelle.  
For those unaware of Rand, she was a mid-20th century writer whose novels feature moral, political and individualist themes. Former Federal Reserve Chair Alan Greenspan was in her tight circle and former Speaker of the House of Representatives Paul Ryan, Senator Rand Paul, and Washington insider Grover Norquist have claimed her as among their greatest influences. he has many detractors, however, who not only refuse to label her work as “philosophy,” but also reject her ideology as defending greed, avoiding social responsibility and encouraging anti-intellectual, destructive instincts. To capture her “philosophy” in a nutshell: things are what they are and you bear full responsibility for what happens to you.

**The Backstory on Galt**

*Atlas Shrugged*, the second commercial success by Ayn Rand, was published in 1957\. While writing *Atlas* and after having achieved financial security from her first novel, *The Fountainhead*, Rand was living in Los Angeles where she held a loosely organized weekend philosophical forum to discuss the economic ideas of Ludwig Von Mises—a towering critic of socialism and US military foreign intervention—and ethical theories which would eventually become a moral defense of “rational self-interest” and called Objectivism.  
	To detractors, Objectivism is a “do whatever you want whenever you want and damn those who try to stop you” ethic. For others, it is a beacon of clarity and respect for the individual in an increasingly globalized world. *Atlas* is the *magnum opus* of this point of view. Sixty of the almost one thousand pages are dedicated to a long, long defense and explanation of “rational self-interest” as the proper moral stance for the future.  These sixty pages are written as a speech delivered by John Galt after he hacked into the radio broadcasting system (note, the novel is set around 1957).   
Naturally, one might wonder: who is John Galt? This question serves as an important plot device throughout the novel as we only meet Galt near the end. For reference, *The Wizard of Oz*  works the same way. A group of people going off to find this mysterious wizard; “we’re off to see the wizard” is the same thing as “who is John Galt,” but with a twist as some characters in the novel ask this question in the same way people today might say “who knows” or “c’est la vie” or “it is what it is.”  
	We come to learn that John Galt was a promising philosophy student, then a brilliant engineer, then a social activist against Socialism, then he disappeared. The key event occurs while he is working as an engineer and the company implements a series of policies which distribute the profits equally amongst the workers. Galt not only doesn’t think this is fair since the better workers should get a bigger share, but more importantly he argues that this policy will result in the collapse of the company. Unable to convince the group, he retreats to a secret location. While in hiding, he hatches a plan to prove to the world that they cannot exploit the talents of exceptional people to benefit the less talented. The plan—and the prevailing thought experiment subsuming the philosophical argument of the novel—is to remove all the talented people from society, as he states the iconic line, “I will stop the motor of the world.” The theory is that *if* all the talented people leave, *then* society will fall apart. *Therefore*, society should value and reward the talented people more than everyone else.  
	You might think “well, don’t we already do that?”  
	Galt argues we do not. For while we have been following an ethic of altruism and helping others, evil people who exploit the system have come into power. In order to maintain power, they equalize the talented—who would otherwise take power from them—with the untalented—who are then grateful to the bad people for giving them things they would otherwise  be unable to achieve on their own. So, *if* all the talented people went on strike, *then* those people balancing and exploiting this exchange would have no way to make sure the lights stay on, literally. (Spoiler alert: at the end of the book the lights in New York turn off and Galt and the talented people return to pick up the pieces and implement a new world order).  To put it another way: we need to stop people who exploit those with talent.

**The Backstory on Chappelle**

Perhaps you can already see the parallel to Chappelle’s life. He was an extremely talented standup comic, successful actor, and innovative variety show producer; then got fed up with the system and turned down a $50 million contract on principle; disappeared to South Africa for a few weeks, then stayed home to raise his family; and now he is back\!  
John Galt stopped the motor of the world on purpose and came back to clean everything up. Chappelle certainly didn’t think everything was going to stop when he left, but he recognized the same thing Galt did: there is severe injustice in the world. While Galt took on the responsibility of hatching a grand plan to change the world, Chappelle lives in the real world and does what you’re supposed to when you feel powerless: take a beat and think.  The two ultimately  came to the same conclusion: to change the world one must first  take individual responsibility.  
	For those of us growing up in the 2000s, we probably didn’t see Chappelle’s pensive side. Re-watching old HBO specials, however, you can see many of the same themes and issues he talks about now—still in between filthy jokes, but these days he highlights social themes rather than sex and drugs. I remember watching *Chappelle’s Show* when it first aired and thinking: “this guy is deep...wait, the guy from *Half-Baked*\!\!??” Little did we know at the time, not only was he deep, he was also seething with anger at the system. He was angry at the networks for exploiting him, society for dismissing him as only being the jokes he told, and himself for playing into it.  
	The irony is that laced within those seemingly goofy sketches and dick jokes are important social and cultural critiques. Whether or not you see them depends on how you see Dave Chappelle. Thus, by choosing to step back, travel to South Africa, mourn the loss of his father, and raise his children, he allows that commentary to come to the surface. Sometimes the best way to get your point across is to be quiet...sometimes.

**The Moment**  
	  
John Galt becomes John Galt when he stands up at the company meeting and declares that management’s decision to distribute the company’s profits equally, rather than according to the value of each individual employee, would destroy the company. Dave Chappelle became the Dave Chappelle we know today when he abruptly quit the Chappelle Show because he felt exploited by Comedy Central.   
One could easily imagine a devotee of Ayn Rand thinking Chappelle was *not* acting according to rational self-interest because he gave up $50 million. I submit Dave Chappelle and John Galt are indeed fighting for the same thing: the ability to *“live as a heroic being, with his own happiness as the moral purpose of his life, with productive achievement as his noblest activity, and reason as his only absolute*” (From the “about the author” section of *Atlas Shrugged)*. This is as clear as Rand can be; Galt surely believes it as well. But does Chappelle?  
The first objection might be that Chappelle isn’t greedy enough to be an Objectivist. There are two issues with this critique , however.   
First, even though Chappelle walked away from $50 million, he is outspoken about protecting what’s his.  He makes a concerted effort to exert respect for the individual, especially oneself.  At the end of the day, the only one who can protect you is you.  When he moves to Ohio and a white guy walks across his lawn, does Dave call the cops?  No: “I see a white dude walking across my property, entitled, like he’s supposed to be there. He had a rifle over his shoulder, too. Ain’t that a bitch? I said, ‘What the fuck is this guy doing on my property?’ I was mad as shit, but I was unarmed. So, I ended up just waving to this motherfucker like a bitch. I was just, like… And as soon as he got far enough away, I ran to my car and sped to Kmart.” (*Sticks and Stones)*  
Second, Objectivism doesn’t glorify greed in that seven deadly sins sense. It’s not wanting to “get all the money” greed, but rather greed for one’s self. Galt’s primary concern is about whether the structure as a whole can survive an ethic which redistributes wealth. That is, it isn’t necessarily his rational self-interest he is protecting, but rather ensuring the conditions which allow acting in accordance with rational self-interest. If the plant owners redistribute the wealth, then he will no longer be able to exercise rational self-interest and thus will remain enslaved to a system which he cannot control. The solution to that problem is to attack the arbiters of it. Galt believes that the plant owners are implementing these policies so that they can control the workers. Furthermore, they need to control the workers this way because as managers they are weak and talentless. No one would follow them because of who they are, so they need to structure their system to maintain power. Give people a little undeserved income and they will be grateful, devote themselves to you, and give up their power to act in accordance with their own interests. Meanwhile, the people with talent are also forced to give up their power. Not only is it unfair for those with talent to sacrifice what they deserve, but the system will necessarily devolve and eventually collapse.  
	Galt is unable to convince the workers to resist management, so he runs off. While out and about he comes up with the experiment: in order to prove that society should reward those with talent, Galt asks all those with talent to go on strike. Low and behold, he succeeds. All the talented people leave the world to live with Galt in a little off-grid community, the world comes crashing down, and Galt leads them back to pick up the pieces and rebuild.  
	The key factor here is Galt’s rejection of a power structure managed by those who leverage the weak to control the talented and thus maintain their own power. Dave Chappelle resists the very same power dynamic when he decides to bail on *Chappelle’s Show*. He is not being greedy regarding the money, but rather greedy regarding himself. He wants himself to himself.  
	Ownership over one’s self is *the* theme of the new Dave Chappelle. Whether he is discussing race, religion, money, or celebrity, he is concerned with ensuring that the (his?) self is exalted. This is also the key feature of Objectivism. Although shrouded in ideas of money, greed, and anti-communist rhetoric, Objectivism is about having complete ownership over yourself and resisting the forces that try to take control over yourself away from you. In his discussion with Maya Angelou, Maya says, “there is a line beyond which you will not go when lots of money is dangled before people’s eyes.” (*Iconoclasts*, 2006), and this raises the question: who is more greedy? The person who takes the money or the person who takes themselves? I’d suggest it’s the latter, and I think Galt and Chappelle would agree.	

 **But not that kind of greed\!**  
	  
There’s not caring about yourself at all and then there’s only caring about yourself.  And both methods fail.  Instead, you need to be the right amount of greedy.  So what is the right amount of greed?  Well for Dave and John, it depends on who you are: there are those of us in this world \- bless their hearts \- who even if they wanted to help and do good things, they simply couldn’t.  We lack the skills, knowledge and/or determination to do much of anything.  Then there are others who would succeed no matter what they do\!  *Some people are better than others.*  
Now, the problem is: how do we organize a world where some people are better than others\!?  There are two extremes: A) let everyone fight it out and may the best win; Z) give everyone the same amount no matter what.  I don’t think anyone seriously believes either option is a good idea, but those who lean towards one side love to cast those who lean towards the other as only representing the extreme; and perhaps no one is more guilty of this miscasting than Ayn Rand herself.  She wrote in a letter that Z people (as I call them\!), “deprive ‘those favored by nature’ (i.e., the talented, the intelligent, the creative) of the right to the rewards they produce (i.e., the right to life)—and grant to the incompetent, the stupid, the slothful a right to the effortless enjoyment of the rewards they could not produce, could not imagine, and would not know what to do with.”(*Philosophy: Who Needs It?*)  Much like our tribal culture today, she groups anyone even slightly to left of her position as an outright violent, Stalinist communist; but even though Ayn Rand wrote John Galt’s words, I think he holds a slightly different view, and those differences make him not only more interesting intellectually, but also similar to Dave.  
In his manifesto speech at the end of *Atlas Shrugged*, Galt, clearly channeling Rand, waxes and wanes in a relatively sophomoric way about free will, rationality, and morality.  While his results may not be that interesting, the problem he is responding to is very important.  Here’s the context once more.  Galt rallied against his employers who wanted to distribute company profits equally to all employees, and after that failed, he disappeared and started convincing other powerful people to go on strike.  If all the important people went on strike, then the *engine of the world would stop turning*.  He says, “We are on strike against self-immolation. We are on strike against the creed of unearned rewards and unrewarded duties. We are on strike against the dogma that the pursuit of one’s happiness is evil. We are on strike against the doctrine that life is guilt.” (*Atlas Shrugged)*  When in fact the “engine” does stop, he returns to the chaos and delivers his speech after hijacking a local radio station.  He not only explains why he did what we did, but also what people need to do to move forward.  The key insight is that the world does not only consist of producers and non-producers, but also managers.  And the managers cause the problems.  Producers are happy to employ and support non-producers in so far as they contribute their time and energy to projects, but producers shouldn’t be expected to support non-producers because of what Galt calls a “false morality of guilt”.  Where does that morality of guilt come from?  The managers.  That is their tool.  The managers take a cut for implementing and sustaining the false morality.  Galt set the producers on strike against the managers, not necessarily the non-producers.  
In a similar vein, Dave tells a gut wrenching story about Iceberg Slim, a manager of escorts c. 1940 and the author of *Pimp*.  In this wonderful moment of dark truth and self-expression, Dave delivers a transparent vision of what he thinks is wrong with the world.  He introduces the Iceberg Slim story with, “We should take care of each other...We should forgive the ones of us that are weaker and support the ones of us that are stronger. And then we can beat the thing. If you guys keep going after individuals, the system is going to stay intact.”(*The Bird Revelation)*  What system is he talking about?  I think it’s the same system John Galt is talking about.  Some people are better than others, and we could live together and help each other out if it weren’t for these managers, networks, and pimps hustling out their cut for doing nothing.    
In the story about Iceberg, Dave notes the pimp’s skills: being able to tell a prostitute’s mileage (how many tricks she could turn before she loses her mind); how to control a prostitute; and, his most important skill, how to get more out of someone than he originally thought he could, or how to extend the prostitute’s mileage.  Slim doesn’t produce anything, he just keeps the bitch in line and takes his cut.  Dave marvels at, “the coldest capitalist concepts I’ve ever heard in my life. He describes in detail how these men break women so that they will give them the money that they make with their own bodies.” (*The Bird Revelation)*.  This is exactly what John Galt’s revolt is about: non-producers exploiting the work of the producers.  Pimps exploiting hoes.  Managers exploiting workers.  Dave doesn’t shy away from the obvious analogy: “Why the fuck you think most of us work from nine to five? ‘Cause nine to six might kill a bitch.” (*The Bird Revelation)*   
So what does self-determination require?  How do you know if you’re a producer?  And what can you do to make sure you don’t exploit others?  For Dave and John that means understanding your value: “You will never get your fucking money back. Fuck that. I’m like Eval Knievel: I get paid for the attempt.” (*The Age of Spin)*

**Perhaps too far?**

So, how does someone come to an understanding of their value?  Luckily \- just before submitting the final version of this essay \- Dave posted *Unforgiven* on Instagram, in which he explains his view on how to do this\!  For what it’s worth, I don’t agree with Dave, but what is a philosophy essay without a little critique?\!  
There are two potential errors one could make: first, you need to make sure you aren’t undervaluing yourself, since if people undervalue themselves, then those who understand the system will take advantage of that surplus; second, you cannot overvalue yourself, or the system will simply reject you.  I think Dave’s provocation is an important step towards opening people’s minds to the fact that they are undervalued by the system and need to advocate for themselves.  Unfortunately, he doesn’t sufficiently warn people about the dangers of overvaluing.  
In the *Unforgiven* taping, Dave tells three stories.  First, him watching a 3 card monte racquet.  Second, his contract signing with Comedy Central for *Chappelle Show*.  Third, his demands that Netflix stop streaming *Chappelle Show* until he is properly compensated for his work.  Across these three experiences, Dave makes 3 critical errors as a result of improperly valuing himself, but he only recognizes one of them.  Because he doesn’t acknowledge the other two lessons, he takes a suboptimal course of action to get what he deserves, and perhaps importantly he sacrifices opportunity to affect the system itself..  While it may work out for him (Netflix did in fact stop streaming *Chappelle Show* as of my finishing this essay the night of Thanksgiving 2020), taking such a risk is not recommended for those in similar situations.  Instead, those who would otherwise follow his lead should heed not only the first lesson, but the other two as well.

*Lesson 1: never get between a man and his meal (3 card monte)*  
The most obvious challenge when valuing yourself is negotiating the fact that everyone else is valuing themselves as well\!  If you value yourself in a way that completely disrupts your counterparts valuing, then you won’t make a deal.  At worst, you’ll get beat up, or killed...sidenote: my favorite line from *Upload*: “you threatened a $600bil industry and nobody murdered you, right...nobody murders anyone anymore.”  
Dave relies on this principle a lot.  It’s the basis of his criticism of the \#metoo movement.  You can’t call bullshit on the system, and expect the system to magically conform to your critique.  Instead, you need to understand not only what you think your value is, but also how the system values you.  And if there is a mismatch, you need to position yourself to negotiate with the system to either achieve an acceptable valuation OR create the opportunity for revolution.  If you strike too soon, you’ll lose.  Strike too late, and you’ll have to accept your fate.  
There is the micro-tactical lesson about how to gain power, and then there’s the macro lesson about what to do when you have the power.  This raises an important distinction between Dave and Ayn Rand, in fact.  Dave learned that if you are lucky enough to have won from the minority position, then you have to set your sights on bigger fish.  Ayn Rand, on the other hand, continued to attack the same group after she found success.  She continued to fight for herself even after she had won.  The effect is that she devalued herself by fighting down, and lost the respect of those she originally sought to impact. 

	*Lesson 2: set the right expectations for yourself (signing the Comedy Central deal)*  
	Dave transitions from the 3 card monte mishap to signing the deal with Comedy Central.  He recognized the same dynamic: a bunch of people who know each other chewing up the greenie.  Rather than getting beat up, he accepts what he considers a raw deal.  In this case, however, Dave makes a mistake.  He assumes that the board room is the same dynamic, and that he should understand this scenario as reifying the previous lesson.  Instead, there is another lesson: in any given scenario you need to not only understand your value, but also set the right expectation.   
It’s a rare scenario that you will ever receive value equivalent to your value.  Normally, you’ll have to accept some kind of discount.  However, you can mitigate the harm from taking the discount by factoring in your situation when you enter the negotiation.  If you have nothing to begin with, then you need to set the expectation for your return commensurate to your needs.  You might be worth $100mil, but you have very little leverage to start so you have to make sure you get what you need from the transaction rather than holding out for what you think you deserve.  That is, if you overvalue what you think you should get, you will likely end up getting nothing.  And, of course, this is what happened to Dave.    
Unfortunately, he doesn’t learn this lesson.  Instead, he falsely equivocates it to the 3 card monte scam.  But it isn’t the same hustle.  The network wasn’t simply grifting him.  They were factoring the risk of developing his show and the 50 other shows they were piloting at the time.  Their return on 1 success has to cover the loss on the other 49\.  Forking away from this realization and understanding the network to function like a 3 card monte scam sends him down a dangerous route...the route Ayn Rand took.  I think Dave is striking too soon, and the revolution will fail.  BUT, we are still watching this play out and I could very well be wrong.

Lesson 3: *your value determines your future, not your past* (*what to do with* Chappelle Show?)  
Because Dave fails to learn lesson \#2, he makes what I think is the gravest error, and the error has nothing to do with his scuffle with Comedy Central or networks in general.  The mistake is to Monday morning QB and attempt to rectify systemic injustice.  The biggest problem with this is that he KNOWS this lesson.  It’s the same lesson he teaches to the \#metoo movement.  If you try to change the system, it will rebound on you 3-fold.  That is, once you’ve won, you need to look to the future.  The success was in recognizing the failures and attempting to rebuild the system moving forward, not looking for reparations from the past.  Should the networks compensate Dave?  Sure.  They probably should write him a check.  But will that change anything?  No.  Dave just gets a bunch of money.  Whoopie.  But that won’t change anything except get him a bigger house\!  And if his gripe for reparations fails, then he is in an even weaker position to enact systemic change.  He’s picking a fight for a phantom payoff at the cost of the mission.  
Dave has a choice.  He knows his value now.  Project that value into the future to create a new system.  Don’t make the same mistake as Ayn Rand and hold a grudge against the old one.  And he touches on it: yes, do a new *Chappelle Show*\!  Own that show.  Move on and create even better stuff, rather than trying to collect on the current value of old stuff.

**Wrapping Up**

Ayn Rand is a tricky person to evaluate philosophically.  Objectivism is loose, naive thinking.  But there is something important to recognize: understand your value.  Every philosopher and revolutionary understands this, so pointing it out is typically unnecessary; unless you’re speaking to people who haven’t spent time to explore and evaluate these questions, which unfortunately describes many people\!  
I don’t think Dave is a mega phone for Rand.  But he does tease out and give new life to her core insight.

